Changes to azure architecture, requested by Microsoft via JCorcoran (#113)
KxSystems/docs: docs/cloud/azure/architecture.md

# :kx-brands-azure: Reference architecture for Azure

<!-- Kdb+ is the technology of choice for many of the world’s top financial institutions when implementing a tick-capture system for timeseries analysis. Kdb+ is capable of processing large amounts of data in a very short space of time, making it the ideal technology for dealing with the ever-increasing volumes of financial tick data.
 -->

_Lift and shift your kdb+ plants to the cloud and leverage virtual machines (VM) with storage_

> ??? tip "This classic approach relies on the existing license. To benefit more from the cloud technology, migrate to kdb Insights."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
??? tip "This classic approach relies on the existing license. To benefit more from cloud technology, migrate to kdb Insights."
```

>     kdb Insights provides a range of tools to build, manage and deploy kdb+ applications in the cloud. It supports interfaces for deployment and common ‘Devops’ orchestration tools such as Docker, Kubernetes, Helm, and others. It supports integrations with major cloud logging services. It provides a kdb+ native REST client; Kurl, to authenticate and interface with other cloud services. kdb Insights also provides kdb+ native support for reading from Azure Blog Storage, and a packaging utility, QPacker to build and deploy kdb+ applications to the cloud. By taking advantage of kdb Insights’ suite of tools, developers can quickly and easily create new

Reviewer: I'm not sure that we use qpacker any more. I'm checking with Donal Dempsey...
Later... yup, I don't think we offer qpacker to clients. @natalietanner can you pls check with Zsolt and remove refs to qpacker?

Reviewer 2: I'm checking this with the tech-leads but right now we do not mention anything about deprecating or concluding support for QPacker on the public docs.
If we receive the green flag to remove any reference then it's all fine. The downside right now is that we have no plausible alternative for QPacker that would make any such use-case much harder.
Also, internally every service that uses Q is built by QPacker.

Author: I will leave QPacker in for now. If we need to revisit at a later date, we can.

>     kdb Insights provides a range of tools to build, manage and deploy kdb+ applications in the cloud. It supports interfaces for deployment and common ‘Devops’ orchestration tools such as Docker, Kubernetes, Helm, and others. It supports integrations with major cloud logging services. It provides a kdb+ native REST client; Kurl, to authenticate and interface with other cloud services. kdb Insights also provides kdb+ native support for reading from Azure Blog Storage, and a packaging utility, QPacker to build and deploy kdb+ applications to the cloud. By taking advantage of kdb Insights’ suite of tools, developers can quickly and easily create new

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    kdb Insights provides a range of tools to build, manage and deploy kdb+ applications in the cloud. It supports interfaces for deployment and common ‘Devops’ orchestration tools such as Docker, Kubernetes, Helm, and others. It supports integrations with major cloud logging services. It provides a kdb+ native REST client; Kurl, to authenticate and interface with other cloud services. kdb Insights also provides kdb+ native support for reading from Azure Blog Storage, and a packaging utility, QPacker to build and deploy kdb+ applications to the cloud. By taking advantage of the kdb Insights suite of tools, developers can quickly and easily create new
```

    and integrate existing kdb+ applications on Microsoft Azure.

    **Deployment**

>     -   QPacker – A packaging utility that supports q, Python and C

Reviewer: qpacker issue as above

        libraries

    -   Detailed guide to deploy kdb+ applications to the cloud

>     **Service Integration**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    **Service integration**
```

    -   QLog – Integrations with major cloud logging services

    -   Kurl – Native kdb+ REST client with authentication to cloud
        services

    **Storage**

>     -   Kdb+ Object Store – Native support for reading and querying Azure

Reviewer: When "kdb" is at the beginning of a sentence, do we capitalise the "k"? My opinion is no, but it's subjective. kdb is a brand name, always written in lower case within a sentence. I note that kx.com uses lower case k (recently changed, I think), so that's what I'm going with.

Reviewer 2: Good spot, it's lower case indeed.
The original document predates this marketing approach.

Author: I'll ensure this is the case throughout.

>     -   Kdb+ Object Store – Native support for reading and querying Azure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    -   kdb+ Object Store – Native support for reading and querying Azure
```

        Blob Storage

> ## Kdb+ architecture patterns in Microsoft Azure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## kdb+ architecture patterns in Microsoft Azure
```

> Kdb+tick is an architecture which allows the capture, processing and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kdb+tick is an architecture that allows the capture, processing and
```

querying of timeseries data against realtime, streaming and historical

> data. This reference architecture describes a full solution running

Reviewer: Should there be a separate paragraph here? So...

```suggestion
data. 

This reference architecture describes a full solution running
```

kdb+tick within Microsoft Azure which consists of these functional
components:

-   datafeeds
-   feedhandlers
-   tickerplant
-   realtime database
-   historical database

> -   KX gateway

Reviewer: What is KX gateway (I think it's part of KX Platform) and do we supply it to clients?

Reviewer 2: As the services introduced above are distributing the data across multiple processes a Gateway concept had been introduced that would orchestrate data access.
For Core KDB there's a white paper that describes the details as this is up to the customer to customize: https://code.kx.com/q/wp/gateway-design/

An architectural pattern for kdb+tick in Microsoft Azure:

![architecture diagram](img/architecture.png)

Note the ability to place kdb+ processing functions either in one Azure Virtual Machine (VM)
instance or distributed across many Azure VM instances. The ability for
kdb+ processes to communicate with each other through kdb+’s built-in
language primitives, allows for this flexibility in final design
layouts. The transport method between kdb+ processes and overall
external communication is achieved through low-level TCP/IP sockets. If two
components are on the same VM instance, then local Unix sockets can be
used to reduce communication overhead.

Many customers have tickerplants set up on their premises. The Microsoft Azure
reference architecture allows you to manage a hybrid infrastructure that communicates with both tickerplants on-premises and

> in the cloud. However, the benefits of migrating them tocloud infrastructure are vast, and include

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the cloud. The benefits of migrating tickerplants to a cloud infrastructure are vast, and include
```

flexibility, auto-scaling, improved transparency in cost management,
access to management and infrastructure tools built by Microsoft, quick
hardware allocation and many more.

This document focuses on kdb+tick deployment to virtual machines in
Azure; however, kdb Insights provides another kdb+ architectural pattern
for deploying to Microsoft Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS).

Refer to [managed app](https://code.kx.com/insights/enterprise/azure-marketplace/kx-managed-app.html) for more details.

### Datafeeds

These are the source data we ingest into our system. For
financial use cases, data may be ingested from B-pipe (Bloomberg), or
Elektron (Refinitiv) or any exchange that provides a data API.
Often the streaming data is available on a pub-sub component like Kafka,

> Solace, etc., all popular for having an open-source interface to kdb+. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Often the streaming data is available on a pub-sub component such as Kafka, or Solace, which are popular for having an open-source interface to kdb+. The
```

datafeeds are in a proprietary format, but always one KX has

> familiarity with. Usually this means a feed handler just needs to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
datafeeds are in a proprietary format, but always one with which KX has
familiarity. Usually this means a feed handler just needs to
```

> familiarity with. Usually this means a feed handler just needs to

Reviewer: Is this true? KX is familiar with all proprietary formats of all datafeeds???

Reviewer 2: "Usually" it is but I aggree it's quite a bold claim, I'm in favor of the below, more mild form.

be aware of the specific data format. Due to the flexible architecture

> of KX most, if not all, underlying kdb+ processes that constitute the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of KX, most underlying kdb+ processes that constitute the
```

system can be placed anywhere in this architecture. For example,
for latency, compliance or other reasons, the datafeeds might be relayed

> through your on-premises data center. Or the connection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
through your on-premises data center. Alternatively, the connection
```

from the feedhandlers might be made directly from the Azure Virtual
Network (VNet) into the market-data source.

> The kdb+ infrastructure is often used to also store internally derived

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The kdb+ infrastructure is often used to store internally derived
```

data. This can optimize internal data flow and help remove latency

> bottlenecks. The pricing of liquid products, for example on B2B markets,

Reviewer: B2B? business-to-business?

Reviewer 2: Or broker to broker?
I would ask James Corcoran to clarify.

is often done by a complex distributed system. This system often changes
due to new models, new markets or other internal system changes. Data in
kdb+ that will be generated by these internal steps will also require

> processing and handling huge amounts of timeseries data. When all the

Reviewer: Doesn't quite make sense to me. Is this what you mean...

```suggestion
due to new models, new markets or other internal system changes. The huge amounts of timeseries data that may be generated by these changes also require processing and handling. Thus, when all the
```

Reviewer 2: A generic scenario in such systems is that timeseries data needs to be replayed and modified to comply with the new model. This means that several years of timeseries data needs to be transformed where KDB can be quite useful.
I think this is again something for James to clarify.

internal components of these systems send data to kdb+, a comprehensive
impact analysis captures any changes.

### Feedhandler

A feedhandler is a process which captures external data and translates
it into kdb+ messages. Multiple feedhandlers can be used to gather data
from several different sources and feed it to the kdb+ system for
storage and analysis.

There are a number of open-source (Apache 2 licensed) [Fusion interfaces](../../interfaces/fusion.md)
between KX and other third-party technologies. Feedhandlers are typically
written in Java, Python, C++ and q.

### Tickerplant

A tickerplant (TP) is a specialized, single-threaded kdb+ process that
operates as a link between the client’s data feed and a number of

> subscribers. It implements a pub-sub pattern, specifically, it receives

Reviewer: What is a pub-sub?

Reviewer 2: publish - subscribe
I would be in favor to not use this abbreviation.

data from the feedhandler, stores it locally in a table then saves it
to a log file. It publishes this data to a realtime database (RDB) and
any clients who have subscribed to it. It then purges its local tables
of data.

Tickerplants can operate in two modes:

mode | operation
-----|----------
batch | collects updates in its local tables; batches up for a period of time and then forwards the update to realtime subscribers in a bulk update

> realtime (zero&nbsp;latency) | forwards the input immediately: requires smaller local tables but has higher CPU and network costs – each message has a fixed network overhead

Reviewer: ```suggestion
batch | Collects updates in its local tables, batches up for a period of time and then forwards the update to realtime subscribers in a bulk update.
realtime (zero&nbsp;latency) | Forwards the input immediately. This requires smaller local tables but has higher CPU and network costs. Each message has a fixed network overhead.
```

API calls:

call | operation
-----|----------
subscribe | add subscriber to message receipt list and send subscriber table definitions

> unsubscribe | remove subscriber from message receipt list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
subscribe | Add subscriber to message receipt list and send subscriber table definitions.
unsubscribe | Remove subscriber from message receipt list.
```

End of Day event: at midnight, the TP closes its log files, auto creates a new file, and notifies the realtime database about the start of the new day.
    

### Realtime database

> The realtime database holds all the intraday data in memory, to
> allow for fast powerful queries. For example, at the start of business
> day, the RDB sends a message to the tickerplant and receives a reply

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The realtime database holds all the intraday data in memory to
allow for fast powerful queries. For example, at the start of the business
day, the RDB sends a message to the tickerplant and receives a reply
```

containing the data schema, the location of the log file, and the number
of lines to read from the log file. It then receives subsequent updates
from the tickerplant as they are published. One of the key design
choices for <!-- Amazon Web Services --> Microsoft Azure is the size of memory for this instance,
as ideally we need to contain the entire business day/period of data
in-memory.

Purpose:

-   Subscribed to the messages from the tickerplant
-   Stores (in-memory) the messages received
-   Allows this data to be queried intraday

Actions:

-   On message receipt: insert into local, in-memory tables.
-   End of Day receipt: usually writes intraday data down then sends a
    new End-of-Day message to the HDB. Optionally RDB sorts certain

>     tables (e.g. by sym and time) to speed up queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    tables (for example, by sym and time) to speed up queries.
```

An RDB can operate in single or multi-input mode. The default mode is

> single input in which user queries are served sequentially and queries

Reviewer: ```suggestion
single input, in which user queries are served sequentially and queries
```

> are queued till an update from the TP is processed (inserted into the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are queued until an update from the TP is processed (inserted into the
```

local table).

> In standard tick scripts, the RDB tables are indexed, typically by the
> product identifier. An index is a hash table behind the scene. Indexing
> has a significant impact on the speed of the queries at the cost of a
> bit slower ingestion. The insert function takes care of the indexing,
> i.e. during an update it also updates the hash table.

Reviewer: Please check this. I have re-written slightly and may have changed the meaning.

```suggestion
In standard tick scripts, the RDB tables are indexed (using hash tables), typically by the
product identifier. Indexing has a significant impact on query speed, resulting in slower data ingestion. The insert function takes care of the indexing; during an update it also updates the hash table.
```

Reviewer 2: This sounds allright.

> Performance of the CPU and memory in the chosen Azure VM instance impacts on the overall sustainable rates of ingest and
> queryable rate of this realtime kdb+ function.

Reviewer: Doesn't quite make sense to me. Plus, "queryable" is not a word. How does this sound:

```suggestion
The performance of the CPU and memory in the chosen Azure VM instance impacts the rate at which data is ingested and the time taken to execute data queries.
```

Reviewer 2: Sounds good to me.

On a side note, I guess the language in IT is quite alive https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/queryable

### Historical database

The historical database (HDB) is a simple kdb+ process with a pointer to
the persisted data directory. A kdb+ process can read this data and

> memory maps it, allowing for fast queries across a large volume of data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
memory map it, allowing for fast queries across a large volume of data.
```

Typically, the RDB is instructed by the tickerplant to save its data to
the data directory at EOD from where the HDB can refresh its memory

> mappings. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Typically, the RDB is instructed by the tickerplant to save its data to
the data directory at EOD. The HDB can then refresh its memory from the data directory.
mappings. 
```

HDB data is partitioned by date in the standard tickerplant. If multiple
disks are attached to the box, then data can be segmented and kdb+ makes
use of parallel I/O operations. Segmented HDB requires a `par.txt` file
that contains the locations of the individual segments.

A HDB query is processed by multiple threads, and map-reduce is applied

> if multiple partitions are involved in the query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An HDB query is processed by multiple threads, and map-reduce is applied
if multiple partitions are involved in the query.
```

Purpose:

-   Provides a queryable data store of historical data.
-   In instances involving research and development or data analytics,
    customers can create reports on order execution
    times.

Actions:

-   End of Day receipt - Reload the database to get the new day’s worth
    of data from the RDB write down.

HDBs are often expected to be mirrored locally. Some users, (e.g.
quants) need a subset of the data for heavy analysis and backtesting

> where the performance is critical.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HDBs are often expected to be mirrored locally. If performance is critical, some users, (for example, quants) need a subset of the data for heavy analysis and backtesting.
```

### KX Gateway

In production, a kdb+ system may be accessing multiple timeseries datasets, 
usually each one representing a different market data source, or
using the same data, refactored for different schemas. All core
components of a kdb+tick can handle multiple tables. However, you can
introduce multiple TPs, RDBs and HDBs based on your fault-tolerance
requirements. This can result in a large number of kdb+ components and a

> high infrastructure segregation. A KX gateway generally acts as a single

Reviewer: Is KX Gateway a product? If so, please always write KX Gateway, with capital letters as it's a proper noun. If not, then please always write KX gateway, including in titles. Please search and replace throughout the docs.

point of contact for a client. A gateway collects data from the
underlying services, combines datasets and may perform further data

> operations (e.g. aggregation, joins, pivoting, etc.) before it sends the

Reviewer: I won't bother to pick out all instances, but please do a search and replace to change:
e.g.
to:
for example.

result back to the user.

The specific design of a gateway can vary in several ways according to
expected use cases. For example, in a hot-hot setup, the gateway can be
used to query services across availability zones.

The implementation of a gateway is largely determined by the following

> factors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
factors:
```

-   Number of clients or users
-   Number of services and sites
-   Requirement for data aggregation
-   Support of free-form queries
-   Level of redundancy and failover

> The task of the gateway is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The task of the gateway is to:
```

-   Check user entitlements and data-access permissions
-   Provide access to stored procedures, utility functions and business logic
-   Gain access to data in the required services (TP, RDB, HDB)
-   Provide the best possible service and query performance

The KX Gateway must be accessible through Azure security rules from all
clients of the kdb+ service. In addition, the location of the gateway

> service also needs to have visibility to the remaining kdb+ processes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
service also needs to have visibility of the remaining kdb+ processes
```

constituting the full KX service.

## Storage and filesystem

> Kdb+ tick architecture needs storage space for three types of data:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kdb+tick architecture needs storage space for three types of data:
```

> Kdb+ tick architecture needs storage space for three types of data:

Reviewer: I'll stop pulling out the Kdb+ (with a capital K), so pls search and replace all instances of Kdb with kdb (lower case k).

> *TP log*

Reviewer: What is TP?

:   If the TP needs to handle many updates,
    then writing to it needs to be fast since slow I/O may delay updates

>     and can even cause data loss. Optionally, you can write updates to

Reviewer: Do we need to say this bit about data loss? That's serious stuff. Should this be a warning box?

    the TP log in batches (e.g. every second) as opposed to in real time.

>     You will suffer data loss if TP or instance is halted unexpectedly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    You will suffer data loss if the TP or an instance of the TP is halted unexpectedly
```

    second of data loss is probably marginal to the whole outage window.

    If the RDB process goes down, then it can replay data to recover from
    the TP log. The faster it can recover, the fewer data are waiting in
    the TP output queue to be processed by the restarted RDB. Hence, a fast
    read operation is critical for resilience reasons. Using Azure Premium
    SSD Managed Disk or Ultra disk, or a subsection of an existing Lustre
    filesystem on Azure is likely a good solution.

!!! note "Managed disks are more resilient and would still contain the data despite any Azure VM restart or loss."

*Sym file (and `par.txt` for segmented databases)*

:   The sym file is
    written by the realtime database after end-of-day, when new
    data is appended to the historical database. The HDB processes will
    then read the sym file to reload new data. Time to read and write
    the sym file is often marginal compared to other I/O operations.
    Usually it is beneficial here to be able to write down to a shared
    filesystem, thereby adding huge flexibility in the Azure Virtual
    Network (VNet). (E.g. any other Azure VM instance can assume this

>     responsibility in a stateless fashion.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:   The sym file is
    written by the realtime database after end of day, when new
    data is appended to the historical database. The HDB processes 
    then read the sym file to reload new data. Time to read and write
    the sym file is often marginal compared to other I/O operations.
    Usually it is beneficial here to be able to write down to a shared
    filesystem, thereby adding huge flexibility in the Azure Virtual
    Network (VNet). (Any other Azure VM instance can assume this
    responsibility in a stateless fashion.)
```

*HDB data*

:   Performance of the filesystem solution will determine
    the speed and operational latency for kdb+ to read its historical
    (at rest) data. The solution needs to be designed to cater for good
    query execution times for the most important business queries. These
    may splay across many partitions or segments of data or may deeply
    query on few or single partitions of data. The time to write a new
    partition impacts RDB EOD work. For systems that are queried around

>     the clock the RDB write time needs to be very short.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:   Performance of the filesystem solution determines
    the speed and operational latency for kdb+ to read its historical
    (at rest) data. The solution needs to be designed to cater for good
    query execution times for the most important business queries. These
    may splay across many partitions or segments of data or may deeply
    query on few or single partitions of data. The time to write a new
    partition impacts RDB EOD work. For systems that are queried around
    the clock the RDB write time must be very short.
```

One advantage of storing your HDB within the Azure ecosystem is the
flexibility of storage. This is usually distinct from “on-prem” storage,
whereby you may start at one level of storage capacity and grow the
solution to allow for dynamic capacity growth. One huge advantage of
most Azure storage solutions (e.g persistent disks) is that disks can
grow dynamically without the need to halt instances, this allows you to
dynamically change resources. For example, start with small disk
capacity and grow capacity over time.

The reference architecture recommends replicating data. Either this can
be tiered out to lower cost or lower performance object storage in Azure or
the data can be replicated across availability zones. The latter may be
useful if there is client-side disconnection from other time zones. You
may consider failover of service from Europe to North America, or
vice-versa. Kdb+ uses POSIX filesystem semantics to manage HDB
structure directly on a POSIX-style file system stored in persistent
storage (Azure Disk Storage _et al._). There are many solutions that offer

> full operational functionality for the POSIX interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One advantage of storing your HDB within the Azure ecosystem is the
flexibility of storage. This is usually distinct from on-premises storage,
whereby you may start at one level of storage capacity and grow the
solution to allow for dynamic capacity growth. One huge advantage of
most Azure storage solutions (for example, persistent disks) is that disks can
grow dynamically without the need to halt instances. This allows you to
dynamically change resources. For example, start with small disk
capacity and grow capacity over time.

The reference architecture recommends replicating data. Either this can
be tiered out to lower cost or lower performance object storage in Azure or
the data can be replicated across availability zones. The latter may be
useful if there is client-side disconnection from other time zones. You
may consider failover of service from Europe to North America, or
vice-versa. Kdb+ uses POSIX filesystem semantics to manage HDB
structure directly on a POSIX-style file system stored in persistent
storage (Azure Disk Storage _et al._). There are many solutions that offer
full operational functionality for the POSIX interface.
```

### Azure Blob Storage

Azure Blob Storage is an object store that scales to exabytes of data.
There are different storage classes (Premium, Hot, Cool, Archive) for
different availability. Infrequently used data can use cheaper but
slower storage. The kdb Insights native object store functionality allows
users to read HDB data from Azure Blob object storage.

> The HDB `par.txt` file can have segment locations that are on Azure Blob

Reviewer: Can we please use one term here.
Azure Blob Storage?
Azure Blob cloud storage?
Azure Blob Object storage?

Looks like (from the MS Azure website) it should be Azure Blob Storage, all initial capitals. Pls search and replace.

object storage. In this pattern, the HDB can reside entirely on Azure
Blob storage or spread across Azure Disks, Azure Files or Azure Blob
Storage as required. There is a relatively high latency when using Azure
Blob cloud storage compared to local storage, such as Azure Disks. The
performance of kdb+ when working with Azure Blob Storage can be improved
by taking advantage of the caching feature of the kdb+ native object
store. The results of requests to Azure Blob Storage can be cached on a
local high-performance disk thus increasing performance. The cache
directory is continuously monitored and a size limit is maintained by

> deleting files according to a LRU (least recently used) algorithm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
deleting files according to an LRU (least recently used) algorithm.
```

Caching coupled with enabling secondary threads can increase the

> performance of queries against a HDB on Azure Blob Storage. The larger

Reviewer: ```suggestion
performance of queries against an HDB on Azure Blob Storage. The larger
```

It is recommended to use compression on the HDB data residing on Azure
Blob Storage. This can reduce the cost of object storage and possible
egress costs, and also counteract the relatively high-latency and low
bandwidth associated with Azure Blob Storage.

Furthermore, Azure Blob Storage is useful for archiving, tiering, and
backup purposes. The TP log file and the sym can be stored each day and
archived for a period of time. The lifecycle management of the object
store simplifies clean-up, whereby one can set the expiration time on any
file. The versioning feature of Azure Blob Storage is particularly
useful when a sym file bloat happens due to feed misconfiguration or
upstream change. Migrating back to a previous version saves the health
of the whole database.

Azure Blob Storage provides strong read-after-write consistency. After a
successful write or update of an object, any subsequent read request
immediately receives the latest version of the object. Azure Blob
Storage also provides strong consistency for list operations, so after a
write, you can immediately perform a listing of the objects in a bucket
with all changes reflected. This is especially useful when there are

> many kdb+ processes reading from Azure Blob Storage, as it ensures
> consistency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
many kdb+ processes reading from Azure Blob Storage.
```

> A kdb+ feed can subscribe to a Azure Blob Storage file update that the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A kdb+ feed can subscribe to an Azure Blob Storage file update that the
```

upstream drops into a bucket and can start its processing immediately.
The data is available earlier compared to the solution when the feed is
started periodically (e.g. in every hour).

### Azure Disk Storage

> Azure Disk Storage can be used to store HDB and Tickerplant data, and is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Azure Disk Storage can be used to store HDB and tickerplant data, and is
```

fully compliant with kdb+. It supports all the POSIX semantics required.
With the introduction of Azure Ultra Disk volumes, users experience
increased performance of 300 IOPS/GiB, up to a maximum of 160 K IOPS per
disk and more durability, reducing the possibility of a storage volume
failure.

### Azure Files

Azure Files over NFS offers NFS service for nodes in the same
availability zone, and can run across zones, or can be exposed
externally. Azure Files can be used to store HDB and tickerplant data

> and is fully compliant with kdb+. Microsoft plan to release to General
> Availability shortly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and is fully compliant with kdb+. Microsoft plan to release to general
availability shortly.
```

### Lustre FS 

[Lustre](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-managed-lustre/) FS is POSIX compliant and built on Lustre, a
popular open-source parallel filesystem which provides scale-out
performance that increases linearly with a filesystem’s size. Lustre
filesystems scale to hundreds of GB/s of throughput and millions of
IOPS. It also supports concurrent access to the same file or directory
from thousands of compute instances and provides consistent,
sub-millisecond latencies for file operations, which makes it especially
suitable for storing and retrieving HDB data.

A Lustre FS persistent file system provides highly available
and durable storage for kdb+ workloads. The file servers in a persistent
file system are highly available and data is automatically replicated
within the same Availability Zone.

A Lustre FS persistent filesystem allows you to choose from

> three deployment options.

Reviewer: What are the options? It's not clear.

## Memory

> The tickerplant uses very little memory during normal operation in
> realtime mode, whilst a full record of intraday data is maintained in
> the realtime database. Abnormal operation occurs if a realtime
> subscriber (including RDB) is unable to process the updates. TP stores
> these updates in the output queue associated with the subscriber. Large
> output queue needs a large memory. TP may even hit memory limits and
> exit in extreme cases. Also, TP in batch mode needs to store data (e.g.
> for a second). This also increases memory need. Consequently, the memory
> requirement of the TP box depends on the setup of the subscribers and
> the availability requirements of the tick system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The tickerplant uses very little memory during normal operation in
realtime mode, while a full record of intraday data is maintained in
the realtime database. Abnormal operation occurs if a realtime
subscriber (including RDB) is unable to process the updates. TP stores
these updates in the output queue associated with the subscriber. Large
output queue needs a large memory. TP may even hit memory limits and
exit in extreme cases. Also, TP in batch mode needs to store data (e.g.
for a second). This also increases memory need. Consequently, the memory
requirement of the TP box depends on the setup of the subscribers and
the availability requirements of the tick system.
```

> The main consideration for an instance hosting the RDB is to use a
> memory optimized VM instance such as the `Standard_E16s_v5` (with 128 GB
> memory), `Standard_E32s_v5` (256 GB memory), etc. Azure also offers VM
> with extremely large memory, `S896oom (BareMetal)`, with 36TiB of memory,
> for clients who need to store large amounts of high-frequency data in
> memory, in the RDB, or even to keep more than one partition of data in
> the RDB form.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main consideration for an instance hosting the RDB is to use a
memory optimized VM instance such as the `Standard_E16s_v5` (with 128 GB
memory), or `Standard_E32s_v5` (256 GB memory). Azure also offers VM
with extremely large memory, `S896oom (BareMetal)`, with 36TiB of memory,
for clients who need to store large amounts of high-frequency data in
memory, in the RDB, or to keep more than one partition of data in
the RDB form.
```

> Bear in mind the tradeoff of large memory and RDB recovery time. The
> larger the tables, the longer it takes for the RDB to start from TP log.
> To alleviate this problem, clients may split a large RDB into two. The
> driving rule for separating the tables into two clusters is the join
> operation between them. If two tables are never joined, then they can be
> placed into separate RDBs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keep in mind the tradeoff of large memory and RDB recovery time. The
larger the tables, the longer it takes for the RDB to start from TP log.
To alleviate this problem, clients may split a large RDB into two. The
driving rule for separating the tables into two clusters is the join
operation between them. If two tables are never joined, then they can be
placed into separate RDBs.
```

> HDB boxes are recommended to have large memories. User queries may

Reviewer: I would prefer "We recommend that HDB boxes have large memories." but I'm not sure who is doing the recommending, so...

```suggestion
It is recommended that HDB boxes have large memories. User queries may
```

require large temporal space for complex queries. Query execution times
are often dominated by IO cost to get the raw data. OS-level caching
stores frequently used data. The larger the memory, the less cache miss

> and the faster the queries run.

Reviewer: Does this make sense? Cache miss? Maybe it's fine if you're technical, but please check.

## CPU

The CPU load generated by the tickerplant depends on the number of

> publishers and their verbosity (number of updates per second) and the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
publishers and their verbosity (number of updates per second), and the
```

number of subscribers. Subscribers may subscribe to partial data, but
any filtering applied consumes further CPU cycles.

The CPU requirement of the realtime database comes from

1.  appending updates to local tables
2.  user queries

> Local table updates are very efficient especially if TP sends batch

Reviewer: TP and tickerplant and ticker plant
Certainly, tickerplant and ticker plant need to be standardised. Is TP the name of a tickerplant product (i.e. a proper noun), or does it also need to be standardised? Please decide on one term and amend throughout the document.

Author: Even on this article all about Tickerplant/tickerplant there is no consistency! 

https://www.qforbeginners.com/knowledge-base/kdb-tick/tickerplant

joins, and call expensive functions. If the RDB is set up in multi-input
mode (started with a negative port) then user queries are executed in
parallel. Furthermore, kdb+ 4.0 supports multithreading in most
primitives, including `sum`, `avg`, `dev`, etc. (If the RDB process is heavily
used and hit by many queries, then it is recommended to start in
multi-process mode by the `-s` command-line option). VMs with many cores
are recommended for RDB processes with large numbers of user queries.

If the infrastructure is sensitive to the RDB EOD work, then powerful
CPUs are recommended. Sorting tables before splaying is a CPU-intensive
task.

Historical databases are used for user queries. In many cases the
IO dominates execution times. If the box has large memory and OS-level
caching reduces IO operations efficiently, then CPU performance
directly impacts execution times.

Azure VM instances optimized for HPC applications, such as the
[HBv4-series](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/hbv4-series) 
(`Standard_HB120rs_v4` with 120 AMD EPYC vCPUs), are recommended for CPU-bound services as described in the use cases above.

## Locality, latency and resiliency

> The standard tick set up on premises requires the components to be placed

Reviewer: on premises, on-premises, on-prem, on prem
Pls choose one term and standardise throughout the document.

Author: Agreed

on the same server. The tickerplant and realtime database
are linked via the TP log file and the RDB and historical database
are bound due to RDB EOD splaying. Customized tickerplants release this
constraint in order to improve resilience. One motivation could be to
avoid HDB queries impacting data capture in TP. You can set up an HDB
writer on the HDB box and RDB can send its tables via IPC at midnight
and delegate the IO work together with the sorting and attribute
handling.

The feedhandlers are recommended to be placed outside the TP box on
another VM between TP and data feed. This way malfunctioning of the feedhandler 

> has a smaller impact on TP stability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is recommended that the feedhandlers are placed outside the TP box on
another VM between the TP and data feed. This way, malfunctioning of the feedhandler 
has a smaller impact on TP stability.
```

### Placement groups

The kdb+ tick architecture can also be set up with placement groups in
mind depending on the use case. A Proximity Placement Group is a
configuration option that Azure offers which lets you place a group of
interdependent instances in a certain way across the underlying hardware
on which those instances reside. The instances could be placed close
together, spread through different racks, or spread through different

> Availability Zones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The kdb+ tick architecture can be set up with placement groups, depending on the use case. A Proximity Placement Group is a
configuration option that Azure offers which lets you place a group of
interdependent instances in a certain way across the underlying hardware
on which those instances reside. The instances could be placed close
together, spread through different racks, or spread through different
Availability Zones.
```

### Cluster placement group

The cluster placement group configuration allows you to place your group
of interrelated instances close together in order to achieve the best
throughput and low latency results possible. This option only lets you
pack the instances together inside the same Availability Zone, either in

> the same Virtual Network (VNet) or between peered VNets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The cluster placement group configuration allows you to place your group
of interrelated instances close together to achieve the best
throughput and low latency results possible. This option only lets you
pack the instances together inside the same Availability Zone, either in
the same Virtual Network (VNet) or between peered VNets.
```

### Spread placement groups

With spread placement groups, each single instance runs on separate
physical hardware racks. So, if you deploy five instances and put them
into this type of placement group, each one of those five instances will
reside on a different rack with its own network access and power, either

> within a single AZ or in multi-AZ architecture.

Reviewer: Please search and replace "will" in this document. Stay in the present tense.

```suggestion
With spread placement groups, each single instance runs on separate
physical hardware racks. So, if you deploy five instances and put them
into this type of placement group, each one of those five instances 
resides on a different rack with its own network access and power, either
within a single AZ or in multi-AZ architecture.
```

## Recovery-time and recovery-point objectives

A disaster-recovery plan is usually based on requirements from both the
Recovery Time Objective and Recovery Point Objective
specifications which can guide the design of a cost-effective solution.
However, every system has its own unique requirements and challenges.
Here we suggest the best-practice methods for dealing with the various
possible failures one needs to be aware of and plan for when building a

> kdb+ tick-based system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A disaster-recovery plan is usually based on requirements from both the
Recovery Time Objective and Recovery Point Objective
specifications, which can guide the design of a cost-effective solution.
However, every system has its own unique requirements and challenges.
Here, we suggest the best-practice methods for dealing with the various
possible failures one needs to be aware of and plan for when building a
kdb+ tick-based system.
```

In all the various combinations of failover operations that can be
designed, the end goal is always to maintain availability of the
application and minimize any disruption to the business.

In a production environment, some level of redundancy is always
required. Depending on the use case, requirements may vary but in nearly
all instances requiring high availability, the best option is to have a

> hot-hot (or ‘active-active’) configuration. There are four main

Reviewer: ```suggestion
hot-hot (or active-active) configuration. There are four main
```

configurations found in production hot-hot, hot-warm, hot-cold,
and pilot-light (or cold hot-warm). 

Term | Description
----------- | ------------------------
Hot-hot | Describes an identical mirrored secondary system running, separate to the primary system, capturing and storing data but also serving client queries. In a system with a secondary server available, hot-hot is the typical configuration as it is sensible to use all available hardware to maximize operational performance. The KX gateway handles client requests across availability zones and collects data from several underlying services, combining data sets and if necessary, performing an aggregation operation before returning the result to the client.
Hot-warm | The secondary system captures data but does not serve queries. In the event of a failover, the KX gateway reroutes client queries to the secondary (warm) system.

> Hot-cold | The secondary system has a complete backup or copy of the primary system at some previous point in time (recall that kdb+ databases are just a series of operating system files and directories) with no live processes running. A failover in this scenario involves restoring from this latest backup, with the understanding that there may be some data loss between the time of failover to the time the latest backup was made.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hot-cold | The secondary system has a complete backup or copy of the primary system at some previous point in time (recall that kdb+ databases are a series of operating system files and directories) with no live processes running. A failover in this scenario involves restoring from this latest backup, with the understanding that there may be some data loss between the time of failover to the time the latest backup was made.
```

Pilot light (or cold hot-warm) | The secondary is on standby and the entire system can quickly be started to allow recovery in a shorter time period than a hot-cold configuration.

Typically, kdb+ is deployed in a high-value system. Hence, downtime can
impact business which justifies the hot-hot setup to ensure high
availability.

Usually, the secondary will run on completely separate infrastructure,
with a separate filesystem, and save the data to a secondary database
directory, separate from the primary. In this way, if the primary system
or underlying infrastructure goes offline, the secondary would be able

> to take over completely.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Usually, the secondary will run on completely separate infrastructure,
with a separate filesystem, and save the data to a secondary database
directory, separate from the primary. In this way, if the primary system
or underlying infrastructure goes offline, the secondary would be able
to take over completely.
```
```suggestion
Usually, the secondary system runs on completely separate infrastructure,
with a separate filesystem, and saves the data to a secondary database
directory, separate from the primary system. In this way, if the primary system
or underlying infrastructure goes offline, the secondary system is able
to take over completely.
```

<br>
:fontawesome-regular-map:
[Data recovery for kdb+ tick](../../wp/data-recovery.md)

## Network

Network bandwidth needs to be considered if the tickerplant
components are not located on the same VM. The network bandwidth between
Azure VMs depends on the type of the VMs. For example, a VM of type
`Standard_D8as_v4` has an expected network bandwidth 3.125 Gbps and a
larger instance `Standard_D32as_v4` can sustain 12.5 Gbps. For a given
update frequency you can calculate the required bandwidth by employing the
[`-22!`](../../basics/internal.md#-22x-uncompressed-length)
internal function that returns the length of the IPC byte representation
of its argument. The tickerplant copes with large amounts of data if
batch updates are sent. Make sure that the network is not your
bottleneck in processing the updates.

### Azure Load Balancer

An Azure Load Balancer is a type of load balancing service by Azure. It
is used for ultra-high performance, TLS offloading at scale, centralized
certificate deployment, support for UDP, and static IP addresses for
your application. Operating at the connection level, network load
balancers are capable of handling millions of requests per second

> securely while maintaining ultra-low latencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An Azure Load Balancer is a type of load balancing service by Azure. It
is used for ultra-high performance, TLS offloading at scale, centralized
certificate deployment, support for UDP, and static IP addresses for
your application. Operating at the connection level, network load
balancers are capable of handling millions of requests per second
securely while maintaining ultra-low latencies.
```
```suggestion
An Azure Load Balancer is a type of load balancing service by Azure. It
is used for ultra-high performance, TLS offloading at scale, centralized
certificate deployment, support for UDP, and static IP addresses for
your application. Operating at the connection level, network load
balancers are capable of securely handling millions of requests per second
while maintaining ultra-low latencies.
```

Load balancers can distribute load among applications that offer the
same service. Kdb+ is single threaded by default. With a negative -p
parameter you can set multithreaded input mode in which requests are
processed in parallel. This however, is not recommended for gateways
(due to socket-usage limitation) and for kdb+ servers that process data
from disk, like HDBs. A better approach is to use a pool of HDB
processes. Distributing the queries can either be done by the gateway
via async calls or by a load balancer. If the gateways are sending sync
queries to the HDB load balancer, then a gateway load balancer is
recommended to avoid query contention in the gateway. Furthermore, there
are other tickerplant components that enjoy the benefit of load
balancers to better handle simultaneous requests.

Adding a load balancer on top of an historical database (HDB) pool is

> quite simple, it only needs three steps. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding a load balancer on top of an historical database (HDB) pool requires only three steps:
```

HDB2 and C3 to HDB1 again. If C1 and C3 send heavy queries and C2 sends
a few lightweight queries, then HDB1 is overloaded and HDB2 is idle. To
improve the load distribution the load balancer needs to go under the
TCP layer and needs to understand the kdb+ protocol.

## Logging

Azure provides a fully managed logging service that performs at scale
and can ingest application and system log data. Azure Monitor allows you
to view, search and analyze system logs. It provides an easy to use and
customizable interface so that e.g. DevOps can quickly troubleshoot
applications.

Azure Monitor Logs enables you to see all of your logs, regardless of
their source, as a single and consistent flow of events ordered by time.
Events are organized into log streams and each stream is part of a log
group. Related applications typically belong to the same log group.

You don’t need to modify your tick scripts to enjoy the benefits of
Azure Monitor. The Azure Monitor agent can be installed and configured
to forward your application log to Azure Monitor. You should use the
policies and policy initiatives below to automatically install the agent

> and associate it to a data-collection rule, every time you create a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and associate it with a data-collection rule, every time you create a
```

Feedhandlers log new data arrival, data and connection issues. The TP logs
new or disappearing publishers and subscribers. It can log if the output
queue is above a threshold. The RDB logs all steps of the EOD process
which includes sorting and splaying of all tables. The HDB and gateway
can log every user query.

Kdb+ users often prefer to save log messages in kdb+ tables. Tables that
are unlikely to change are specified by a schema, while entries that
require more flexibility use key-value columns. Log tables are ingested
by log tick plans and these Ops tables are separated from the tables
required for the business.

One benefit of storing log messages is the ability to process log
messages in qSQL. Timeseries join functions include as-of and window
joins. For example, gateway functions are executed hundreds of times
during the day. The gateway query executes RDB and HDB queries, often
via a load balancer. All these components have their own log entries.
You can simply employ Window Join to find relevant entries and perform
aggregation to get insight into the performance characteristics of the
execution chain. Note nothing prevents you from logging both to

> kdb+ and to Azure Monitor.

Reviewer: Please decide how to write "window join" and be consistent. Initial capitals or not?

> execution chain. Note nothing prevents you from logging both to
> kdb+ and to Azure Monitor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
execution chain. Please note that you can log both to
kdb+ and to Azure Monitor.
```

> KX Insights QLog provides kdb+ cloud-logging functionality. QLog

Reviewer: Please search for KX Insights and replace throughout with kdb Insights.

```

QLog generates structured, formatted log messages tagged with a
severity level and component name. Routing rules can also be configured
to suppress or route based on these tags.

Existing q libraries that implement their own formatting can still use
QLog via the base APIs. This enables them to do their own formatting but
still take advantage of the QLog-supported endpoints. Integration with
cloud logging application providers can easily be achieved using
logging agents. These can be set up alongside running containers or virtual
machines to capture their output and forward to logging endpoints, such
as Azure Monitor.

Azure Monitor supports monitoring, alarming and creating dashboards. It
is simple to create a Metric Filter based on a pattern and set an alarm
(e.g. sending email) if a certain criterion holds. You may also wish to
integrate your KX monitoring for kdb+ components into this cloud logging
and monitoring framework. The purpose is the same, to get insights into
performance, uptime and overall health of the applications and the
servers pool. You can visualize trends via dashboards.

## Interacting with Azure services

> People interact with Azure services manually via the console web
> interface. You may also need to interact from a q process. There are
> three easy ways to do this. To demonstrate, we will get the list of
> Virtual Machines for a specific Azure Tenant from a q process using

Reviewer: interact with a q process? or interact with Azure services from a q process? Pls check.

```suggestion
People interact with Azure services manually via the console web
interface. You may also need to interact from a q process. There are
three easy ways to do this.  The following demonstration shows how to get a list of
Virtual Machines for a specific Azure Tenant from a q process using:
```
```suggestion
People interact with Azure services manually via the console web
interface. You may also need to interact with a q process. There are
three ways to do this. To demonstrate, we will get the list of
Virtual Machines for a specific Azure Tenant from a q process using
```

-   a system call to the Azure CLI
-   embedPy via the Azure SDK for Python
-   the Kurl Rest API client

### Azure CLI

A q process can run shell commands by calling the function `system`. The
example below shows how we can get the list of virtual machines. We
assume the Azure CLI is installed on the script-runner machine.

```txt
(38env) stran@amon:~$ q
KDB+ 4.0 2020.07.15 Copyright (C) 1993-2020 Kx Systems
l64/ 4(16)core 7959MB stran amon 127.0.1.1 EXPIRE ..
```
```q
q) system "az vm list --output table"
"Name            ResourceGroup          Location   Zones"
"--------------- ---------------------- ---------- -------"
"staging-bastion STAGING-RESOURCE-GROUP westeurope"
"tempVM          STAGING-RESOURCE-GROUP westeurope"
"windowsvm       WINDOWSVM_GROUP        westeurope"
```

> This example shows how the Azure CLI form q using the system function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example shows how the Azure CLI forms q using the system function.
```

Using embedPy, a q process can load a Python environment and easily
query the list of virtual machines for a given Azure tenant.

```txt
(38env) stran@amon:\~/development/Azure$ q
KDB+ 4.0 2020.07.15 Copyright (C) 1993-2020 Kx Systems 
l64/ 4(16)core 7959MB stran amon 127.0.1.1 EXPIRE ..
```
```q
q)\l p.q
q)p)from azure.identity import ClientSecretCredential
q)p)from azure.mgmt.compute import ComputeManagementClient
q)p)Subscription_Id = "xxxxxxxx"
q)p)Tenant_Id = "xxxxxxxxx"
q)p)Client_Id = "xxxxxxxxx"
q)p)Secret = "xxxxxxxxx"
q)p)credential = ClientSecretCredential(tenant_id=Tenant_Id,
client_id=Client_Id, client_secret=Secret)
q)p)compute_client = ComputeManagementClient(credential,
Subscription_Id)
q)p)for vm in compute_client.virtual_machines.list_all(): print(vm.name)
staging-bastion
tempVM
windowsvm
q)
```

## Natively via Kurl REST API

Finally, you can send HTTP requests to the Azure REST API endpoints. KX
Insights provides a native q REST API called Kurl. Kurl provides
ease-of-use cloud integration by registering Azure authentication
information. When running on a cloud instance, and a role is available,

> Kurl will discover and register the instance metadata credentials. When

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kurl discovers and registers the instance metadata credentials. When
```

running outside the cloud, OAuth2, ENV, and file-based credential
methods are supported. Kurl takes care of your credentials and properly

> formats the requests. In the code lines below, we are calling the Azure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
formats the requests. In the code lines below, we call the Azure
```

defined in the top-level `qp.json` file. The QPK file resulting from each
application is installed into the image and integrated with Systemd to
allow the `startq.sh` launch script to start the application on boot.

## Azure Functions

Function as a service (FaaS) is an interesting cloud technology that
lets developers create an application without considering the complexity
of building and maintaining the infrastructure that runs it. Cloud
providers support only a handful of programming languages natively.
Azure’s FaaS solution, [Functions](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/products/functions/),
supports Bash scripts that can start any executable including a q
script.

One use case is to start a gateway by Azure Functions to execute a
client query. This provides cost transparency, zero cost when service is
not used and full client query isolation.

## Access management

We distinguish application- and infrastructure-level access control.
Application-level access management controls who can access kdb+
components and run commands. Tickerplant, realtime database,
and historical database are generally restricted to kdb+ infrastructure

> admins only and the gateway is the access point for the users. One

Reviewer: ```suggestion
admins only and the gateway is the access point for the users. One
```
```suggestion
administrators only and the gateway is the access point for the users. One
```

responsibility of the gateway is to check if the user can access the
tables (columns and rows) s/he is querying. This generally requires
checking user ID (returned by `.z.u`) against some organizational
entitlement database, cached locally in the gateway and refreshed
periodically.

### Secure access – Azure Bastion

Azure Bastion, a fully platform-managed PaaS service that you provision
inside your virtual network, lets you manage your kdb+ Azure Virtual
Machines through an RDP and SSH session directly in the Azure portal
using a single-click seamless experience. Azure Bastion provides secure
and auditable instance management for your kdb+ tick deployment without
the need to open inbound ports, maintain bastion hosts, or manage SSH
keys.

> We would use this for permissioning access to the KX gateway. This is a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use this to permission access to the KX gateway. This is a
```

 -->

_Lift and shift your kdb+ plants to the cloud and leverage virtual machines (VM) with storage_

??? tip "This classic approach relies on the existing license. To benefit more from the cloud technology, migrate to KX Insights."

    KX Insights provides a range of tools to build, manage and deploy kdb+ applications in the cloud. It supports interfaces for deployment and common ‘Devops’ orchestration tools such as Docker, Kubernetes, Helm, etc. It supports integrations with major cloud logging services. It provides a kdb+ native REST client, Kurl, to authenticate and interface with other cloud services. KX Insights also provides kdb+ native support for reading from Azure Blog Storage, and a packaging utility, QPacker to build and deploy kdb+ applications to the cloud. By taking advantage of KX Insights’ suite of tools, developers can quickly and easily create new
    and integrate existing kdb+ applications on Microsoft Azure.

    **Deployment**

    -   QPacker – A packaging utility that supports q, Python and C
        libraries

>     -   Detailed guide to using Helm and Kubernetes to deploy kdb+

Reviewer 2: I think this guide will not use Helm and Kubernetes to deploy kdb+
This probably should be a link to https://code.kx.com/insights/enterprise/azure-marketplace/kx-managed-app.html ?

Note the ability to place
kdb+ processing functions either in one Azure Virtual Machine (VM)
instance or distributed across many Azure VM instances. The ability for
kdb+ processes to communicate with each other through kdb+’s built-in
language primitives, allows for this flexibility in final design
layouts. The transport method between kdb+ processes and overall
external communication is done through low-level TCP/IP sockets. If two
components are on the same VM instance, then local Unix sockets can be
used to reduce communication overhead.

Many customers have tickerplants set up on their premises. The Microsoft Azure
reference architecture allows you to manage a hybrid
infrastructure that communicates with both tickerplants on-premises and
in the cloud. However, the benefits of migrating them to
cloud infrastructure are vast, and include
flexibility, auto-scaling, improved transparency in cost management,
access to management and infrastructure tools built by Microsoft, quick
hardware allocation and many more.

This document focuses on kdb+tick deployment to virtual machines in
Azure; however, KX Insights provides another kdb+ architectural pattern

> for deploying to Microsoft Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS).

Reviewer 2: I think this link is needed: https://code.kx.com/insights/enterprise/azure-marketplace/kx-managed-app.html

The KX Gateway must be accessible through Azure security rules from all
clients of the kdb+ service. In addition, the location of the gateway
service also needs to have visibility to the remaining kdb+ processes
constituting the full KX service.

## Storage and filesystem

Kdb+ tick architecture needs storage space for three types of data:

*TP log*

:   If the TP needs to handle many updates,
    then writing to it needs to be fast since slow I/O may delay updates
    and can even cause data loss. Optionally, you can write updates to
    the TP log in batches (e.g. every second) as opposed to in real time.
    You will suffer data loss if TP or instance is halted unexpectedly
    or stops or restarts, as the recently received updates are not
    persisted. Nevertheless, you already suffer data loss if a TP
    process or the Azure VM instance goes down or restarts. The extra
    second of data loss is probably marginal to the whole outage window.

    If the RDB process goes down, then it can replay data to recover from
    the TP log. The faster it can recover, the fewer data are waiting in
    the TP output queue to be processed by the restarted RDB. Hence, a fast

>     read operation is critical for resilience reasons. Using Azure Premium

Reviewer 2: Probably worth noting that managed disks are more resilient and would still have the data despite any Azure VM restart or loss.

Storage also provides strong consistency for list operations, so after a
write, you can immediately perform a listing of the objects in a bucket
with all changes reflected. This is especially useful when there are
many kdb+ processes reading from Azure Blob Storage, as it ensures
consistency.

A kdb+ feed can subscribe to a Azure Blob Storage file update that the
upstream drops into a bucket and can start its processing immediately.
The data is available earlier compared to the solution when the feed is
started periodically (e.g. in every hour).

### Azure Disk Storage

Azure Disk Storage can be used to store HDB and Tickerplant data, and is
fully compliant with kdb+. It supports all the POSIX semantics required.
With the introduction of Azure Ultra Disk volumes, users experience
increased performance of 300 IOPS/GiB, up to a maximum of 160 K IOPS per
disk and more durability, reducing the possibility of a storage volume
failure.

### Azure Files

Azure Files over NFS offers NFS service for nodes in the same
availability zone, and can run across zones, or can be exposed
externally. Azure Files can be used to store HDB and tickerplant data

> and is fully compliant with kdb+. NFS support for Azure Files is

Reviewer 2: We can drop the "preview" sentence as this is already globaly available.

currently in preview. Microsoft are planning on getting it to General
Availability shortly.

> ### Lustre FS (placeholder)

Reviewer 2: Azure Managed Lustre FS is a valid option now. Details here: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-managed-lustre/
We can remove the "placeholder" I think.

suitable for storing and retrieving HDB data.

A Lustre FS (placeholder) persistent file system provides highly available
and durable storage for kdb+ workloads. The file servers in a persistent
file system are highly available and data is automatically replicated
within the same Availability Zone.

A Lustre FS (placeholder) persistent filesystem allows you to choose from
three deployment options.

## Memory

The tickerplant uses very little memory during normal operation in
realtime mode, whilst a full record of intraday data is maintained in
the realtime database. Abnormal operation occurs if a realtime
subscriber (including RDB) is unable to process the updates. TP stores
these updates in the output queue associated with the subscriber. Large
output queue needs a large memory. TP may even hit memory limits and
exit in extreme cases. Also, TP in batch mode needs to store data (e.g.
for a second). This also increases memory need. Consequently, the memory
requirement of the TP box depends on the setup of the subscribers and
the availability requirements of the tick system.

The main consideration for an instance hosting the RDB is to use a

> memory optimized VM instance such as the `Standard_E16s_v4` (with 128 GB

Reviewer 2: I think we can start mentioning _v5 now as that's the latest.

1.  appending updates to local tables
2.  user queries

Local table updates are very efficient especially if TP sends batch
updates. Nevertheless faster CPU results in faster ingestion and lower
latency. User queries are often CPU intensive. They perform aggregation,
joins, and call expensive functions. If the RDB is set up in multi-input
mode (started with a negative port) then user queries are executed in
parallel. Furthermore, kdb+ 4.0 supports multithreading in most
primitives, including `sum`, `avg`, `dev`, etc. (If the RDB process is heavily
used and hit by many queries, then it is recommended to start in
multi-process mode by the `-s` command-line option). VMs with many cores
are recommended for RDB processes with large numbers of user queries.

If the infrastructure is sensitive to the RDB EOD work, then powerful
CPUs are recommended. Sorting tables before splaying is a CPU-intensive
task.

Historical databases are used for user queries. In many cases the
IO dominates execution times. If the box has large memory and OS-level
caching reduces IO operations efficiently, then CPU performance will
directly impact execution times.

> Azure VM instances optimized for HPC applications, such as the

Reviewer 2: The latest machine series here: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/hbv4-series

securely while maintaining ultra-low latencies.

Load balancers can distribute load among applications that offer the
same service. Kdb+ is single threaded by default. With a negative -p
parameter you can set multithreaded input mode in which requests are
processed in parallel. This however, is not recommended for gateways
(due to socket-usage limitation) and for kdb+ servers that process data
from disk, like HDBs. A better approach is to use a pool of HDB
processes. Distributing the queries can either be done by the gateway
via async calls or by a load balancer. If the gateways are sending sync
queries to the HDB load balancer, then a gateway load balancer is
recommended to avoid query contention in the gateway. Furthermore, there
are other tickerplant components that enjoy the benefit of load
balancers to better handle simultaneous requests.

Adding a load balancer on top of an historical database (HDB) pool is
quite simple, it only needs three steps. 

1.   Create a Network Load Balancer with protocol TCP. Set the name, Availability Zone, Target Group name and Security group. The security group needs an inbound rule to the HDB port. 

> 2.   Create a launch template. A key part here is the User Data window where you can type a startup-script. It mounts the volume that contains the HDB data and the q interpreter, sets environment variables (e.g. `QHOME`) and starts the HDB. The HDB accepts incoming TCP connections from the Load Balancer so you need to set up an inbound Firewall rule via a Security Group. You can also leverage an Image (AMI) that you already created from an existing EC2. 

Reviewer 2: Let's change: 
~~You can also leverage an Image (AMI) that you already created from an existing EC2.~~
You can also leverage a Custom Image that you already created from an existing Azure VM.

Container Registry etc.).

Software is often built by disparate teams, who may individually have
remit over a particular component, and package that component for
consumption by others. QPacker will store all artefacts for a project in
a QPK file. While this file is intended for binary dependencies, it is
also portable across environments.

QPacker can interface with Hashicorp Packer to generate virtual-machine
images for Azure. These VM images can then be used as templates for
a VM instance running in the cloud. When a cloud target is passed to
QPacker (`qp build -azure`), an image is generated for each application
defined in the top-level `qp.json` file. The QPK file resulting from each
application is installed into the image and integrated with Systemd to
allow the `startq.sh` launch script to start the application on boot.

## Azure Functions

Function as a service (FaaS) is an interesting cloud technology that
lets developers create an application without considering the complexity
of building and maintaining the infrastructure that runs it. Cloud
providers support only a handful of programming languages natively.

> Azure’s FaaS solution, <!--FIXME link [Functions](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/functions/) -->,

Reviewer 2: The link should be https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/products/functions/

keys.

We would use this for permissioning access to the KX gateway. This is a
key task for the administrators of the KX system, and both user and API
access to the entire system is controlled entirely through the KX
gateway process.

## Hardware specifications

A number of Azure VM types are especially performant for kdb+ workloads.

Azure offers five different sub-groups of VMs in the memory-optimized
family – each with a high memory-to-vCPU ratio. Although the DSv2-series
11-15 and Esv4-series have a comparable vCPU to memory ratio, DSv2R
instances support bandwidth up to 24.4Gbps and max uncached disk
throughput performance of 62.5K IOPS and expected network bandwidth of
24.4Gbps, providing 2× higher disk throughput and network bandwidth
performance compared to Esv4 instances.

The Azure Hypervisor, based on Windows Hyper-V, is the native hypervisor
powering the Azure Cloud Service platform and providing the building
blocks for delivering Azure Virtual Machine types with a selection of
compute, storage, memory, and networking options.

service | Azure VM type | storage | CPU,&nbsp;memory,&nbsp;I/O
--------|---------------|---------|-----------------

> tickerplant | _Memory optimized_: Dv2/DSv2, Ev3/Esv3, Ev4/Esv4, M<br>_HPC-optimized_: HBv3 | Azure Managed Premium SSD/Ultra Disk<br>Lustre FS? | High Perf<br>Medium<br>Medium

Reviewer 2: ~~Dv2/DSv2, Ev3/Esv3, Ev4/Esv4~~
Dv4/DSv4, Ev4/Esv4, Ev5/Esv5

Reviewer 2: I think the same changes need to happen with the below as well
